It's now time for one of the most fun parts
of this project and that's building a gallery
with CSS grid.
That's exactly what you're going to learn in this lecture.
How to create a complex grid-looking gallery,
one that you can really see that it was built
with an underlying grid.
And for that, you're also going to learn
how to use object fit together with images for grid items.
This is the gallery that I'm talking about.
From the beginning, I wanted to include something like this
in this project because it's really a perfect use case
for CSS grid because you can really see
how these images were literally aligned
to an underlying grid.
It's really visible, so it's a perfect use case
and actually, it would have been maybe not impossible,
but extremely difficult to do this without CSS grid.
Again, it's a perfect use case to show you, once again,
how powerful CSS grids are.
How do we go about creating this grid structure?
We have to select the number of columns
and the number of row tracks, of course.
How are we gonna do that?
It seems like a rather complex task, right?
A couple of things about that,
the most important thing to consider is the smallest unit
that you want to have in your grid.
In this case, that would be this cell, here,
like this image.
So, I have to create a grid with as many columns
as necessary to create a small image like this.
So, one of the columns is the size of this image
because it's the smallest unit here
and the same, of course, applies to the row.
So, you'll see that the height of one row
is the height of this unit here.
This height is actually visible here
anywhere over the place.
So, the height of this unit here is also, for example,
this one here, and so that's going to allow us
to place items like this using some spanning
so that it really looks like this huge grid here in the end
with all of these items aligned like this,
with some images bigger than the others,
like this one and this one, and some smaller ones,
and coming in all different shapes.
This one here is in portrait, this here is a square,
this is also like a square and this one,
so they're similar to the one here.
Basically, the more columns and the more rows you have
the more complex you can create these items here,
the more variety in sizes and shapes
you can create with the grid.
Let us take a look at the underlying grid that we have here.
Let me select it here from the list
and it's this gallery.
So, you see that we have eight columns,
so it goes from line number one to line number nine
and seven rows.
I did this through some experimentation, of course,
which means that you never come up with this
right from the beginning.
Maybe I started with ten columns and ten rows
and then, at some point I noticed that ten
was a bit too much and then, I did an eight by eight grid
and then, I noticed that I don't even need the eighth row
and so, I just cut it to seven rows.
And so, in the end, I ended up
with this eight by seven grid.
And you'll see, again, that this here is the smallest unit
and you'll see this grid cell, for example, over here
on the side and so, basically, each of these areas
that you see here are made up
of a couple of these grid cells.
For example, here we have two and two and here we have four
and here we have nine in this image, here we have six.
And so, again, the more grid cells we have,
the more complex and the more variety that we can have
in these images.
So, let's set up that underlying grid here in CSS
and, of course, we need some grid items,
so let's start with having just one image
so that I can show you how I implemented all of this.
So, down here we should have the gallery.
I'm going to use the image here
and call it gallery_img
and this one is going to be called image and then, gal-1
and gallery image one.
We're going to change this later,
but more on that a bit later.
We can close our home now
and open the gallery file, which is this one.
Let's get rid of this background color,
set display to grid,
and then add our rows and columns.
So, grid-template-columns and, as I mentioned,
I made eight columns and all the same size, of course,
occupying the entire grid container
and then, the rows.
So, template-rows.
Remember that I said that I have seven.
And now, what about the height of each of them?
So, let me show that to you.
What happens when I resize this here?
You see that each of these cells here
actually maintains its aspect ratio perfectly fine.
What that means is that the height of these rows
is somehow tied to the viewport width.
The easiest way to do that is to simply use
the viewport width unit.
That's exactly what I did.
We have seven columns, each on with the height
of five viewport width.
Again, I experimented with these heights
and I came to the conclusion that 5% of the viewport width
is the perfect size for the height.
We, of course, could have done this in a different way
and that is to basically preset the height
of this entire row.
So, basically, preset the height of the row
that contains this gallery container
and then, we could have used the FR unit here as well
and so, that would have then divided equally
the height of the container by the number of rows.
I hope that doesn't sound too confusing,
but I think it's actually a bit more straightforward
to do it like this,
using the viewport with the unit
and so, that will define the height
of this gallery item here, which will then, in turn,
define the height of the row of our overall layout.
Let's take a look at that.
Here we go.
Maybe I shouldn't have removed the background color here.
Actually, yeah, I shouldn't have
because this was actually the correct background color
for this element.
Let's get it back.
I think it was this one.
Okay.
Let's just quickly add another one.
So, gallery number two, just to let me see
how they look like side by side.
But, I see that they're not really side by side,
so let's check out what we have here
and now, that's really weird.
For some reason, we have two columns
and our grid container is way too big,
so I'm not sure what's going on here.
This page is really huge now,
but I don't really have an idea why that is happening.
Let's inspect element.
It tells me that the gallery is 2000 pixels wide now,
which doesn't make much sense,
so let's add this page in Google Chrome
to see if this is maybe a bug with Firefox
and so, I'm just going to copy, here,
the address of our page
and open Google Chrome,
pasting it here, and we see that our site looks good
here, too, in Google Chrome.
That's good to know.
All right, so now I see what's going on here.
It's because these images are huge.
For some reason, in Firefox,
it doesn't show up like this.
The images are actually quite small,
but this shows me why the grid container
is so big right now.
Let's now go back to our code and fix that.
This is just a temporary fix.
Let me simply say that I want all of the child elements
to have a width of 100%.
That should fix it and, indeed, here we go.
That is much better.
Well, actually there's still something going on here.
I'm not sure what's that, but it's no problem.
I'm sure that if I reload the page or something,
then that's gonna disappear
or, if not, it's gonna disappear later
at some point, I'm sure.
Now, remember the talk that we had earlier
about images as grid items.
So, up here we had the same thing.
We had images as grid items
and remember that these images,
they have an intrinsic aspect ratio
and because of that, they don't really fill the grid cells
that they are assigned to.
So, you see that this image here,
it's not really filling up just one of these cells,
but instead, it really overflows it
and stretches as much as it has to
in order to keep its intrinsic aspect ratio
and the same, of course, with this one.
Now, this is going to create a huge problem for our gallery
because these images actually don't have
the same aspect ratio and so, therefore,
this will create a very messy looking gallery,
not exactly like we want it to be
and if we add a gap here to our grid,
then that's going to make it even worse,
so let's actually do that.
So, a grid gap of one point five rem
and, as you have noticed, this gap is always
only between the columns and the rows,
but not on the sides, so not around the grid,
but in this case, we actually want some space
around the grid container as well,
and so, let's just add some padding here.
So, a padding of one point five rem, as well,
and so, that's going to look as if the gutter
was also on the outside of the grid.
Just like that.
Again, we want this image to stop here,
so in order to only occupy this cell
that it was assigned to.
We did actually manually assign it to this cell,
but the grid auto-placement overridden just put this image
here in this first cell and the second image
into the second cell.
But still, it's overflowing the cell
and that's not the behavior that we want.
So, how can we fix that?
What we're going to do is a small property
that we've used before in another project
called object fit, and object fit is perfect for this
because, remember, if we set object fit to cover,
it's like setting background size to cover
for the background image.
So basically, having an image filling a container.
What we're going to do here is to add a parent container
for each of these elements, then put the element in there
and add object fit to that parent element.
Does that make sense?
Let me show that to you her in the HTML.
Let's use the figure element here,
which I'm going to call gallery_item
and gallery_item number one.
This is a figure, so I have to put the name in here.
Now, this is where I'm going to put the image.
Let's get rid of this one.
Remember, gallery item is what it is called.
Let's just add that selector
and then, forward the image as well.
We actually want the image to have the width of 100%.
Right?
Let's take a look at that now.
For now, of course, it's still the same,
but now, it's not longer the image that is the grid item
but the figure element, okay?
Now, let's use the object fit property.
We have to do that here on the image element.
Object fit set to cover.
Now, this is only going to work
if you set both the width and the height.
I once tried making this work for half an hour
and it didn't work until I discovered
that I have to manually set both the width and the height.
Let's just set the height to 100% as well.
With that, we're good to go.
Actually, I'm also going to set the image
to a block element.
So, display block because otherwise
it always has this weird, small, white space after it
because it's treated like an inline element
and so it's like it's text.
So, that should fix it.
And, indeed, it does.
So, that part that was overlapping
the figure element is now gone.
Let's take a look at that.
So, you see that the figure is right here in the grid cell
and then, the image is in there
and it's now only the height of the parent element itself
and that's, again, because of the object fit
property set to cover.
Let's now position this item.
This is the number one.
So, grid-row from one and span to
and this one, the same.
Now, it's going to be bigger.
Yep.
And, you'll see that it's only occupying
the exact grid area that we defined,
just like we have it here.
It's now exactly the same,
no longer causing the problems
with the intrinsic aspect ratio that we had before.
The first image is now placed,
we now know how this works and how we do all of this.
In the next video, we can then place
all of the remaining images in order to make it look,
in the end, just like this.
Stay tuned and see you in a minute.